README.md, before:

# twostep

HOTP and TOTP algorithms for 2-step verification (for OCaml).

This project implements algorithms for 2-step verification,
being the HMAC-based One-Time Password
(see [RFC 4226](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4226)) and the
Time-based One-Time Password
(see [RFC 6238](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6238)).

## Installation

If available on OPAM, try:

```shell
opam install twostep
```

Otherwise, you can install the development version of this
project with OPAM's `pin` command.

## Usage

The authentication of 2-step verification needs prior known
and shared secret between the client and server. If no
secret was send before, you can generate this Base32 secret
with:

```ocaml
let secret: string = Twostep.TOTP.secret();; (* kinda "A222 BBBB 3333 D5D5" *)
```

As an additional note, the `Twostep.TOTP.secret` function above uses
a cryptographically safe PRNG, that is, a secure source of pseudo
randomness. To generate the OTP code, for testing purposes mostly
('cause this one-time code should be generated on client-side -- unless
you use this library on the client's device), you can use this function:

```ocaml
let code: string = Twostep.TOTP.code ~secret:secret ();; (* kinda "098123" *)
```

The function above assumes the `SHA-1` hash algorithm, 30 seconds
as timestep/window before refreshed code, `6` digits for output
number code (padded with zeros on left sometimes) and no clock
drifts / not-sync time between server and client (that is, no
30 seconds on the past or on the future).

To verify one-time codes sent from client-side, use the following
function:

```ocaml
let valid: bool = Twostep.TOTP.verify ~secret:secret ~code:code ();;
```

This function assumes the same configuration of `Twostep.TOTP.code`,
except for the clock drift, where `Twostep.TOTP.verify` assumes too
past and future 30 seconds (ideal on slow connections or latency
problems). For the full API reference or coverage status, please refer to:
- [Generated API docs](https://www.marcoonroad.dev/twostep/apiref/twostep/index.html)
- [Generated API coverage](https://www.marcoonroad.dev/twostep/apicov/index.html)

You can test this library against mobile apps such as Google
Authenticator or Microsoft Authenticator without no problems
(I have tested myself too).

## Security Concerns

The generated secret must be sent for the
client in a secure channel, such as **HTTPS/TLS**, and must
be stored encrypted in your servers' databases. A good
approach is to encrypt with a KDF on the client password,
after you checking the client password against the strongly
hashed version on database (prefer 512-bits hash algorithms
whenever possible, and a KDF in front of this with server's
salt is ideal too). So, in this approach the front app must
send the client password twice, during authentication and
during 2-step verification, and after that, erasing the
password persisted on front (nice UX for the client to not
type twice her own password).

Also, you should track valid TOTP codes sent from the end user in
a persisted storage (such as databases). This is just to avoid
**replay attacks** once an attacker intercepts a valid TOTP code from
the end user. Your tracking of the TOTP code should be a pair
`(otpCode, timeNonce)`, where `timeNone` is the current interval/period
and the `otpCode` is verified/checked as valid. Keep in mind that
you should only track valid/verified TOTP codes to not waste storage
costs with invalid TOTP codes (i.e, codes that can't be exploited by
replay attacks). This rule only applies for TOTP algorithms, not for
HOTP algorithms too -- 'cause they have the counter increased even for
failed verification attempts.

---

This is a warning. Implement such system carefully, and if
possible, with audits from external experts and security
teams. As a disclaimer, I'm not responsible for any damages.

---

## Tips

For stronger/longer secrets, you can use the `~bytes` optional parameter
(the default and minimal value is 10,
_with the invariant that it must be divisible by 5_):

```ocaml
let secret: string = Twostep.TOTP.secret ~bytes:20 ();;
(* kinda "D3D3 F5F5 A2A2 3B3B GGGG 7K7K 5555 Q2Q2" *)
```

## Remarks

Pull requests are welcome! Happy hacking! Hope this project can
help you to solve problems.

Commit message:

fix: :beetle: source code mismatch with hotp rfc regarding counter update on verification failure
Signed-off-by: Marco Aurélio da Silva <marcoonroad@gmail.com>

README.md, after:

# twostep

HOTP and TOTP algorithms for 2-step verification (for OCaml).

This project implements algorithms for 2-step verification,
being the HMAC-based One-Time Password
(see [RFC 4226](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4226)) and the
Time-based One-Time Password
(see [RFC 6238](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6238)).

## Installation

If available on OPAM, try:

```shell
opam install twostep
```

Otherwise, you can install the development version of this
project with OPAM's `pin` command.

## Usage

The authentication of 2-step verification needs prior known
and shared secret between the client and server. If no
secret was send before, you can generate this Base32 secret
with:

```ocaml
let secret: string = Twostep.TOTP.secret();; (* kinda "A222 BBBB 3333 D5D5" *)
```

As an additional note, the `Twostep.TOTP.secret` function above uses
a cryptographically safe PRNG, that is, a secure source of pseudo
randomness. To generate the OTP code, for testing purposes mostly
('cause this one-time code should be generated on client-side -- unless
you use this library on the client's device), you can use this function:

```ocaml
let code: string = Twostep.TOTP.code ~secret:secret ();; (* kinda "098123" *)
```

The function above assumes the `SHA-1` hash algorithm, 30 seconds
as timestep/window before refreshed code, `6` digits for output
number code (padded with zeros on left sometimes) and no clock
drifts / not-sync time between server and client (that is, no
30 seconds on the past or on the future).

To verify one-time codes sent from client-side, use the following
function:

```ocaml
let valid: bool = Twostep.TOTP.verify ~secret:secret ~code:code ();;
```

This function assumes the same configuration of `Twostep.TOTP.code`,
except for the clock drift, where `Twostep.TOTP.verify` assumes too
past and future 30 seconds (ideal on slow connections or latency
problems). For the full API reference or coverage status, please refer to:
- [Generated API docs](https://www.marcoonroad.dev/twostep/apiref/twostep/Twostep/index.html)
- [Generated API coverage](https://www.marcoonroad.dev/twostep/apicov/index.html)

You can test this library against mobile apps such as Google
Authenticator or Microsoft Authenticator without no problems
(I have tested myself too).

## Security Concerns

The generated secret must be sent for the
client in a secure channel, such as **HTTPS/TLS**, and must
be stored encrypted in your servers' databases. A good
approach is to encrypt with a KDF on the client password,
after you checking the client password against the strongly
hashed version on database (prefer 512-bits hash algorithms
whenever possible, and a KDF in front of this with server's
salt is ideal too). So, in this approach the front app must
send the client password twice, during authentication and
during 2-step verification, and after that, erasing the
password persisted on front (nice UX for the client to not
type twice her own password).

Also, you should track valid OTP codes sent from the end user in
a persisted storage (such as databases). This is just to avoid
**replay attacks** once an attacker intercepts a valid OTP code from
the end user. Your tracking of the OTP code should be a pair
`(otpCode, nonce)`, where `nonce` is the current interval / period
(if using TOTP algorithm, otherwise nonce will be a HOTP counter)
and the `otpCode` is verified / checked as valid. Keep in mind that
you should only track valid / verified OTP codes to not waste storage
costs with invalid TOTP codes (i.e, codes that can't be exploited by
replay attacks).

---

This is a warning. Implement such system carefully, and if
possible, with audits from external experts and security
teams. As a disclaimer, I'm not responsible for any damages.

---

## Tips

For stronger/longer secrets, you can use the `~bytes` optional parameter
(the default and minimal value is 10,
_with the invariant that it must be divisible-by / multiple-of 5_):

```ocaml
let secret: string = Twostep.TOTP.secret ~bytes:20 ();;
(* kinda "D3D3 F5F5 A2A2 3B3B GGGG 7K7K 5555 Q2Q2" *)
```

## Remarks

Pull requests are welcome! Happy hacking! Hope this project can
help you to solve problems.
